Udif: A Human Readable and Writable Data Interchange Format
===========================================================

Provides a file format for exchanging data held in strings, lists, and 
dictionaries.  In this way it is similar to JSON, YaML, or StrictYaML, but with 
a restricted set of supported data types, the file format is simpler. It is 
designed to be easy to enter with a text editor and easy to read.  The small 
number of data types supported means that are only a small number of rules and 
exceptions that need to be remembered when creating a file.  The result is 
a data file that can be created, modified, or viewed  with a text editor and can 
be understood and used by both programmers and non-programmers.


File Format
-----------

A dictionary is represented as a collection of dictionary items, which are 
key/value pairs where the key and value are separated by a colon and the value 
is terminated by an end of line. The colon must be followed by a space or 
a newline to act as the key/value separator. So for example::

    name: Katheryn McDaniel
    phone: 1-210-835-5297
    email: KateMcD@aol.com

In this example both the keys and values are strings.  Keys are always strings, 
but as shown in a bit, the values may be strings, dictionaries or lists.

A list is represented as a collection of list items, which are values that are 
introduced with a dash and end at the end of line. So for example::

    - Alabama
    - Alaska
    - Arizona
    - Arkansas

Values may be multi-line strings.  A multi-line string is a newline followed by 
one or more indented text lines. It ends when the indentation ends::

    name: Katheryn McDaniel
    address:
        138 Almond Street
        Topika, Kansas 20697
    phone: 1-210-835-5297
    email: KateMcD@aol.com

Normally multi-line strings would have neither leading or trailing newlines.  
However, you can place blank lines at the start or end of the string to add such 
newlines.

A value can also be a list or another dictionary::

    president:
        name: Katheryn McDaniel
        address:
            138 Almond Street
            Topika, Kansas 20697
        phone:
            cell: 1-210-835-5297
            home: 1-210-478-8470
        email: KateMcD@aol.com
        kids:
            - Joanie
            - Terrance

    vice president:
        name: Margaret Hodge
        address:
            2586 Marigold Land
            Topika, Kansas 20697
        phone: 1-470-974-0398
        email: margarett.hodge@uk.edu
        kids:
            - Arnie
            - Zach
            - Maggie

Dictionaries and lists can be nested to an arbitrary depth.

Indentation is always a multiple of 4 spaces and you can only increase one level 
at a time. Thus the start of a key, a list item dash or the start of a string 
always starts after exactly a multiple of 4 spaces.  You can start the lines in 
your multi-line strings after the point were they are expected to begin to add 
leading spaces to your string. For example::

    greeting: Dearest Katherine:
    body:
            It has been such a long time. I am very much looking forward to
        seeing both you and Margaret again.
    closing: See you soon.
    signature: -Rupert

In this example, the value of *body* is a multi-line string for which the first 
line is indented by 4 spaces.  The second line in *body* has no leading space.
In other words, on multi-line strings, the indentation required by this format 
is removed from the each line in the string, but any indentation in excess of 
what is required by the format is retained. Also retained is any trailing space 
on each line.  This differs from single line strings: leading and trailing 
spaces are trimmed from single line strings.

Blank lines within dictionaries or lists are ignored, but in multi-line strings 
blank lines act to continue the string even if no indentation is present.  Lines 
that start with a hash ``#`` are ignored.

Also notice in the last example that the value for *greeting* ends in a colon.  
This does not represent an issue. Only a hash as the first character on a line, 
a leading dash-space on a line, or the first non-quoted colon-space are treated 
as special.

Multiline keys are not supported; a key must not contain a newline. In addition, 
all keys in the same dictionary must be unique. If a key contains leading or 
trailing spaces, a leading '- ', or a ': ' anywhere in the key, you should quote 
the key.  Either single or double matching quotes may be used.  Single line 
string values should also be quoted in leading or trailing spaces are 
significant. The quotes clarify the extent of the value.
For example::

    sep: ' â€” '
    '- key: ': "- value: "

Here is typical example::

    >>> contents = """
    ...     # backup settings for root
    ...     src_dir: /
    ...     excludes:
    ...         - /dev
    ...         - /home/*/.cache
    ...         - /root/*/.cache
    ...         - /proc
    ...         - /sys
    ...         - /tmp
    ...         - /var/cache
    ...         - /var/lock
    ...         - /var/run
    ...         - /var/tmp
    ...     keep:
    ...         hourly: 24
    ...         daily: 7
    ...         weekly: 4
    ...         monthly: 12
    ...         yearly: 5
    ...     passphrase:
    ...         trouper segregate militia airway pricey sweetmeat tartan bookstall
    ...         obsession charlady twosome silky puffball grubby ranger notation
    ...         rosebud replicate freshen javelin abbot autocue beater byway
    ... """

Notice that even though some values are given as integers, their values are 
retained as strings.


Reader
------

You can read a data file using::

    >>> import udif
    >>> from inform import render
    >>> from textwrap import dedent

    >>> try:
    ...     data = udif.load(dedent(contents))
    ... except udif.Error as e:
    ...     e.report()

    >>> print(render(data))
    {
        'src_dir': '/',
        'excludes': [
            '/dev',
            '/home/*/.cache',
            '/root/*/.cache',
            '/proc',
            '/sys',
            '/tmp',
            '/var/cache',
            '/var/lock',
            '/var/run',
            '/var/tmp',
        ],
        'keep': {
            'hourly': '24',
            'daily': '7',
            'weekly': '4',
            'monthly': '12',
            'yearly': '5',
        },
        'passphrase': """\
            trouper segregate militia airway pricey sweetmeat tartan bookstall
            obsession charlady twosome silky puffball grubby ranger notation
            rosebud replicate freshen javelin abbot autocue beater byway\
        """,
    }


Writer
------

You can use `udif.dump()` to convert a data structure consisting of 
dictionaries, lists, and strings.

    >>> try:
    ...     print(udif.dump(data))
    ... except udif.Error as e:
    ...     e.report()
    src_dir: /
    excludes:
        - /dev
        - /home/*/.cache
        - /root/*/.cache
        - /proc
        - /sys
        - /tmp
        - /var/cache
        - /var/lock
        - /var/run
        - /var/tmp
    keep:
        hourly: 24
        daily: 7
        weekly: 4
        monthly: 12
        yearly: 5
    passphrase:
        trouper segregate militia airway pricey sweetmeat tartan bookstall
        obsession charlady twosome silky puffball grubby ranger notation
        rosebud replicate freshen javelin abbot autocue beater byway

There are two approaches to handling object that are otherwise unsupported, like 
integers, floats, and Booleans.

In the first you simply specify a default renderer, which is a function that 
converts objects to strings. Typically values are *str* and *repr*.

    >>> data = {'key': 42, 'value': 3.1415926, 'valid': True}

    >>> try:
    ...     print(udif.dump(data))
    ... except udif.Error as e:
    ...     print(str(e))
    unsupported type: 42

    >>> try:
    ...     print(udif.dump(data, default=repr))
    ... except udif.Error as e:
    ...     e.report()
    key: 42
    value: 3.1415926
    valid: True

In the second, you specify a dictionary of renderers. The dictionary maps the 
object type to a render function.

    **Example**::

        >>> renderers = {
        ...     bool: lambda b: 'yes' if b else 'no',
        ...     int: hex,
        ...     float: lambda f: f'{f:0.3}'
        ... }

        >>> try:
        ...    print(udif.dump(data, renderers=renderers))
        ... except udif.Error as e:
        ...     e.report()
        key: 0x2a
        value: 3.14
        valid: yes

Finally, you can use both methods together.  Any normally unsupported type that 
is not contained in *renderers* is handled by *default*.


Releases
--------

**Latest development release**:
    | Version: 0.0.2
    | Released: 2020-08-26


Open Questions
--------------

Should I use ': ' or '=' for dictionary items?  '=' may look more normal.

Should I use '- ' or '# ', '~ ', or '. ', or '* ' for list items? Some of the 
alternatives may be used less commonly in values, which can reduce quoting.

Are the restrictions on keys acceptable (single line, only one type of internal 
quotes)?

Should I use 4 spaces as indentation?

What is a good name for this package? human-dif (as in human data interchange 
format) or human-dex (human data exchange format).
